Last week we began a new series called Life Matters and what we've been talking within that series is about the matters of life and the matters of the mission.
Like we are on this planet because as followers of Jesus because our job is not done.
We could worship better in heaven, we could be with God better in heaven, we could do all those things better if we were in His presence but we're here still here for a reason and that reason, that mission
We state it this way is to help people find and follow Jesus.
And so what we're gonna do over these five weeks and we started last week is we're gonna find some tools to put in our toolbox to accomplish that mission.
Okay, I'm supposed to help people find and follow Jesus.
How do I do that?
What are the things I need to be equipped with to do that?
And the first one we looked at last week is we need to know what truth is.
We have to know what truth is.
The truth is not a concept.
The truth is not just some piffy sayings by some wise men and women.
Truth we found out last week is the character of God and the person and work of Jesus.
There are a bunch of things that are true, but what we get to tell people about isn't just we go to church, isn't just we listen to Christian music, isn't just we wear Jesus t-shirts, isn't just that we have verses tattooed on the back of our arm,
We get to tell people about the character and person and work of Jesus because that's what they need to hear about, not our Christian things, right?
And so Pilate asked Jesus, what is truth?
And he responded basically with, well, the better question is who is truth?
Who is truth?
And then today we're going to look at something that I think is vital.
to helping people find and follow Jesus.
And I don't think it would end up on a lot of people's list, but man, it sure should be and we see it in Jesus over and over and over.
It's this idea of proximity and empathy.
And here's why that's the tool that needs to be in your toolbox, Christian, is because we cannot, I believe we cannot effectively make kingdom ripples from a distance.
And so if you're wondering like, man, what does proximity mean?
Here's proximity, right?
Like right now I'm at distance from my friend Kent, right?
If I wasn't, and I'm gonna get closer to him than he wants a Bears Jersey to ever be as a Packers fan, good to see you bro, touch that, yeah.
Now I'm in proximity, right?
Now I'm in proximity.
So that's what proximity is.
It's just getting in close enough
to have empathy.
My favorite quote on this matter is by Tyler Merritt in a book he wrote called, I Take My Coffee Black.
You should read it if you haven't.
But he says this, distance breeds suspicion, but proximity breeds empathy.
You see, it is really, really easy if you're sitting on this side of the room to have suspicion about someone on that side of the room.
Right?
Someone on that side of the room, it could look like they are dozing off.
It better not be yet.
I just got started, wake up.
Or you could be looking at them and saying, man, look at that.
Or I know this about that person.
Or, man, they're sitting this way.
Or whatever you watch them from afar.
Distance allows you to have suspicion.
It's why the news is dangerous.
Social media is dangerous.
All those kind of things.
It is really, really easy to look far away and be like, hmm, I wonder what their angle is.
All right.
It's really easy to say a bunch of things from a distance, but when we get in proximity, if you walked across the room and you got close and you listened to a story and you found out what's going on, almost always you start to have empathy because now you've grown closer to see what's there.
Harper Lee describes it this way.
You never really understand a person until you consider things from his or her point of view until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.
You know why this sticks out to me and why it struck me when I read it Tuesday studying was this is what God did.
It's exactly what God did.
God climbed into our skin and then walked around in the person of Jesus.
Right?
The word became flesh and dwelt among us, John says, so that he could come close in proximity.
He climbed into our skin to see what we see from the angle that we see it, to feel what we feel firsthand, not just from a distant third heaven.
And he was, as we know from scripture, tempted
As we were tempted, Hebrews, chapter four, verse 15 describes it so well about God's proximity.
He says, we do not have a high priest speaking of Jesus who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses.
How does God know what I'm going through?
How does God understand?
He's God.
He's perfect.
He's so far.
He doesn't live in puree.
He can't fathom it.
Oh, he can because he did.
He says, but one who in every respect, not just some,
has been tempted as we are, yet without sin.
Alfred Adler said, empathy is seeing with the eyes of another, listening with the ears of another, and feeling with the heart of another.
And if you go through the gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and even go into the book of Acts, what you will see is this is exactly why Jesus
did the things he did and the way he did them, right?
So that he could have the eyes of another, so that he could have the listening of another, so he could have the feeling of another, just think about it.
That's why he touched the leper and just didn't heal him, right?
He touched the leper, who cannot be touched, who should be put out of the assembly, should not be, any, it should be quarantined.
And he touched him to heal him.
He sat with Peter on the shoreline after Peter denied him three times.
And not only did he sit with him on the shoreline and enjoy a meal with him, but he also said things to him three times.
He asked him, do you love me three times?
He told him to feed my sheep, feed my lambs three times.
He drew close in proximity.
He washed the feet of his disciples, not through a servant, but through his own hands.
He knelt.
He girded his loins.
He carried the basin.
He washed it.
Even Judas.
He washed his feet.
And he took upon our sin, not upon someone else, but upon himself.
And here's the thing.
Jesus showed us to do the mission.
You have to have proximity and empathy in your toolbox.
And here's the truth.
We can be just like Jesus.
if we get close enough to others to feel.
If we get, Jesus got close enough to feel, and he tells us to do the same thing.
One of the examples is in Romans 12, verse 15, he says, rejoice with those who rejoice and weep with those who weep.
He said, I want you to get close enough to feel what they're feeling, to feel they're rejoicing, to feel they're weeping,
See, because here's what can happen when we allow ourselves to feel what others feel, we begin to see them not as issues to solve, but as people to love.
And let me just encourage you with that.
If you are going to do the mission of Jesus, if you want to go help people find and follow Jesus, they cannot be a project.
They cannot because they know.
They know if you have an angle.
They know if you have an agenda, right?
If you start to,
get in people's lives and you think, man, I'm just gonna draw in proximity so that I can hook them into coming to church and I can Jesus juke them into believing in the gospel and then I can Holy Spirit, personal Holy Spirit convict them and shame them into the baptism tank, then maybe they'll become the people that God wants them to become and no one responds to that.
No one wants to be a project.
Everyone wants to be a person.
And you know when someone feels what you feel.
And you know when someone sees you, not just sees you as a project.
Now I believe in this verse in Romans chapter 12 verse 15, I believe strongly that the first one, rejoicing with those who rejoice is much harder for us, especially in the household of God.
I think we actually don't mind and do the weep with those who weep pretty well.
And you know why, here's why I think, because weeping with those who weep makes us feel good.
It makes us feel good.
Someone loses a loved one like, man, we run right to that.
There's tragedy, we run right to that, right?
We're like, man, because we're serving them and we're with them when we show them how selfless we are, even though we're making us feel good, right?
It's the first one, rejoice with those who rejoice that I think is really hard.
And here's why.
Rejoicing for others is the selfless act of celebrating someone else's blessing, not yours.
It's so hard to celebrate someone else's blessing, especially if you struggle to remember your blessings.
Let me give you a personal example of when I failed at this horribly.
Many moons ago, I lived in Kansas City, Kansas,
That's why my son is a Kansas City Chiefs fan.
And that's why we rooted for the Royals when they won the World Series and best barbecue on the planet.
Hands down Memphis.
You're wrong.
Like we love Kansas City.
We loved it.
And we have friends there that were friends in Ohio.
They were close, close friends, still are friends to this day.
And their names were Kevin and Meagan Alexander.
And they lived about 10 minutes from us.
Went to the same church.
And I remember Kevin and I were talking and he told me about yesterday my parents gave us
a Honda van for free.
And we both had young kids at the time.
Luke and Ethan were really young, and he and his young boys were the same as mine.
He had two, and we were pretty poor.
We were pretty poor.
Things were struggling.
We hadn't owned our first home yet.
And I remember talking to my wife, and I remember thinking, where's my free van, yo?
The Ultimate Beer Larrow is not quite big enough for the crew, you know?
Like, where's the van at?
Must be nice to have parents hook you up with a free van.
Now, if tragedy had hit Kevin and Meagan, I'd be at their house day and night until they needed it.
And publicly with Kevin and Meagan, I was like, dude, that's so awesome!
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I even think he deserved it.
Hi, Kevin.
I know he'll watch now because that doesn't mean.
We see it so hard until we get in proximity to people to rejoice with those who rejoice.
Philippians chapter two, verse three says, here's why we should.
It says, do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility, listen these words.
Count others more significant.
than yourselves.
Wow.
How can I begin to rejoice with those who rejoice to the point where I get in close proximity to them?
And I feel their joy from this blessing.
And I think where God wants us to grow is grow to the place where you're happier.
They got the blessing than you would be if you got it yourself.
Because man, I place Kevin and Meagan more important than myself.
So I'm so glad they got the van and not us.
It's not where I was in my faith.
One Corinthians chapter 10 verse 24 says, let no one seek his own good, but the good of his neighbor.
And we will do that when we get close enough to feel.
If you could feel they're rejoicing, it would make you rejoice.
But from a distance, it's just somebody else who got something that you didn't get.
It's when we tell someone, hey, I think you've grieved long enough.
Never tell someone how long they need to grieve.
Get in proximity close enough to feel what they feel and say, you take the time you need.
I'm here, right?
Job's friend sat with him in ashes for a few days and then said, okay, buddy, boy, it's enough.
What'd you do wrong?
They didn't get close enough in proximity.
Now, there's some good questions to ask yourself that we're going to encourage you to ask this morning.
Here's a few things you could ask.
Am I close enough to feel their celebration or hurt?
Am I close enough to feel that person's celebration hurt or do I need to give it more time?
Am I still too far away to understand?
Do I need to put some prayer into that?
Do I need to put some connection into that?
You can ask, have I taken the time to listen process?
and say, tell me more.
We said this weeks and weeks ago when I did a demonstration up here with a bucket and a well, like, have you dropped your bucket into the heart of that person?
Have you let your bucket down into the well of their heart and said, let me pull out all that's going on so that I can grow in my empathy for their situation?
And then one of the questions I've started to ask myself is, where is my personal pride getting in the way of my rejoicing or weeping?
Where am I not in this situation counting others more significant than myself?
Do I turn what they're sharing into me an opportunity to talk about me?
What do I say focused on them?
Because here's the deal.
Once we can feel empathy begins to settle in and then we can get close enough to support.
Once you feel, then you're in a place to support.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer said, the truest measure of love is how willingly we enter into another suffering.
It's the truest measure of love.
It's not how someone has to pull us into their suffering, but as soon as we see their suffering, we run into that suffering.
We say, hey, we are here and you are not alone.
And one of the best ways to make sure someone's not alone is make sure the word we exist.
We.
us is so important when it comes to doing ministry.
One Corinthians chapter 12 verse 26 says this, if one member suffers, all suffer what?
Together.
I want to say these words, right?
If one member is honored, all rejoice what?
Together, right?
Together.
If one member suffers, we don't just suffer with them.
We suffer together.
And here's why, because support, close enough to support is a team sport.
It's a team sport.
It takes a village for proximity and empathy to be effective.
We don't have everything that every person will need.
And I believe this is a common stake in the church and in ministry.
It's a common mistake we make in the church.
We start to think at times that the church has the answers that everyone needs and the things that everyone needs.
And then we discount counseling and therapy and medical professionals and all those kinds of things, right?
We think, man, just get them in to a church.
and everything will be fine, but that doesn't, that isn't every person's knees.
They need a group of people.
They need one-to-one friendships.
They may need professionals who have professional thoughts about professional things.
I am not a counselor and a therapist.
I know a lot of scripture and I know a lot about God, but I do not have that training, right?
So I need a village to come alongside me to get close enough.
to support.
And for our church to experience this year of overflow, it's going to take a huge remnant of people.
It won't be the 13 or 12 staff online.
And here's why.
Let me give you a few reasons, a few ways in which all of us need to get close enough to support and how you can support
others in the mission.
First, recognize that we are better together.
We call it in a value of vibrant together.
Here's what 1 Corinthians 12 says about the body of Christ.
For the body does not consist of one member, but of many.
Why?
Why are there many members of the body of Christ and not just one or two members?
Because it takes a village, we're better together to meet the needs of our city.
Some of you, all of you in this room have skills, talents, abilities, training that God wants to use in our city, in our church to help people find and follow Christ.
It is not an accident that you are talented or have a heart for what you have a heart for.
It is not.
But here's what you have to do.
You can't just recognize that you were better together.
You also have to sound your note.
You have to sound your note.
And here's how 1 Corinthians chapter 12 describes it.
It goes on in verse 15 and says, if the foot should say, because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body, that would not make it any less a part of the body.
The foot may be down there thinking, well, I'm not the hand, so I don't really belong here, but the foot's still a part of the body, whether it likes it or not.
And if the ear should say, because I'm not an eye, I do not belong to the body.
That would not make it any less part of the body.
And here's why.
If the whole body were an ear, where would be the sense, if the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing?
If the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell?
So imagine if your foot is like, I hate being a foot.
It's the worst.
We're stuck in shoes all the time.
We smell bad.
Got these ugly nails.
Second toe is bigger than the first.
Like, it's just bad, man.
Got hair on top like a hobbit.
It's just bad.
It's bad.
Need to shave that, by the way.
It says, man, I wish there was a hand.
It's all of a sudden, your foot starts acting like an eyeball.
Now you're jacked, right?
But that's what happens in the church.
Men, I wish I had Brian's voice and presence.
Yeah, me too.
But I don't.
It's like a dying frog, right?
It's not my gift.
Men, I wish it could be an orchard, a preacher, and a writer like Chad.
And you're not supposed to be me.
And I'm not supposed to be you.
The body of Christ and the mission need you to sound your note.
Sound your notes.
Play your instrument.
Be the foot, knee, shoulder, whatever you are.
Because if we were all you, we'd be a mess.
We were all me.
Oh, dear Lord, help us.
Right?
You got to sound your note.
But not only that, you need to realize, like, man, we are better together.
And that's how we're going to support people.
And if I sound my note, that's how we're going to support people.
You can't stop there.
You have to do this third thing.
You have to accept your assignment.
You have to begin to ask yourself, God, what is my assignment?
What is my assignment?
Because this is what it says in 1 Corinthians 12.
This is my favorite part of the whole passage.
But as it is, God arranged the members in the body, each one of them, as he chose.
Why has Chad the lead pastor of Richard's Christian church and playing his note the way he's playing it?
Because God chose it that way.
Let's be honest.
I don't live in Peoria because I wanted to.
Duh.
God chose it over five years ago.
And God chose to arrange you in the body the way he had chose to arrange you with the skills, sounds, and buildings.
Right now there's amazing people ministering to our kids.
Why?
Because God chose them.
Right?
If we were all a single member, where would the body be?
As it is, there are many parts yet one body.
Henry now says compassion is not a relationship between the healer and the wounded, is a relationship between equals.
We're equal in here.
God does not see my part of the body more important than yours.
That's not the church you want to be a part of.
And he took the head right off the table when he said, Jesus is the head of the church.
just so no one thinks they can handle that position, right?
So here's some questions, just a question to ask yourself, how can I be used based upon how God created me to support others and help them find and follow Jesus?
Why am I where I am and gifted the way I am at this moment in history?
Well, you're there to help people find and follow Jesus and get close enough to feel and close enough to support.
Now, in the scriptures, there's this really cool reality that comes along with our exercising, proximity, and empathy.
This is super fun.
And it's this, that we have the opportunity not only to get close enough to feel and close enough to support, but we can get close enough to entertain angels.
If you're newer here or you haven't been around the church much, you're like, that's weird.
It is, but it's awesome.
And let me tell you why.
In Hebrews chapter 13, verse one, it says this.
Let brotherly love continue.
Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers.
It's everything we just talked about.
Get close enough to feel, get close enough to support.
And here's what happens when you do.
For thereby some have entertained angels
Unawares People who have got close enough to feel and close enough to support and they let Bradley love flow through them and they showed hospitality to strangers They ended up entertaining angels and not even knowing it Wow
He goes on and says, remember those who are in prison.
I think he's like, they could be angels.
As though in prison with them feel support.
And those who are mistreated, even if it's crossed the pond by the way, since you are also, you also are in the body.
Now there's an example of this.
There's actually a couple in the Old Testament.
So we know that the writer of Hebrews is actually pointing back to that.
And one of the first ones, the clearest example is this guy named Abraham and Genesis 18.
And Abraham and Genesis 18, he's got this wife and they're hanging out and they got their tents and they're out there just going about their day.
And all of a sudden these three individuals start to come his way.
And when he sees them, Abraham has this idea of like, you know what I should do?
I should draw in proximity.
I should welcome them.
I should show hospitality.
And so he quickly says, man, hey, get some bread ready and get a heifer ready and prepare the meal and get ready for these three individuals who are here.
And what he comes to find out what he doesn't know at the first is that Abraham is entertaining the Lord and two angels.
Right there in Genesis 18, Abraham is just minding his business and God has a message for him.
A message is going to make his old wife laugh that she's going to have a baby in 90, right?
Ain't 90s in here want a newborn?
48, I don't want a newborn, right?
And she laughs and Abraham's like, what?
And he is entertaining angels.
How?
Because he showed hospitality unaware of who God could put into his presence.
And Abraham honored them, he cooked for them, he fed them, he listened to their prophetic word.
Here's the lesson.
When we show hospitality, we remember others.
When we make space for interruption, that's a key one that I'm not gonna get much time in today, right?
Ministry asks anybody.
Helping people find and follow Christ is never convenient.
Never, ever, ever convenient.
Never convenient.
It's almost always inconvenient.
Abraham meant he had things to do that day.
And he found himself, imagine if he had ignored the Lord in two angels, unaware.
We never know who we may be serving.
It could, and almost always is, be the Lord.
Say, man, what if I disagree with them?
What if I don't know the person?
What if I don't understand why they see the world that they do?
And let me just encourage you, man, we need so much of what Bernay Brown says right here.
Empathy is not agreeing with someone.
It's understanding them.
And if someone has a view on a thing at a time at a place and there's plenty to choose from right now, you don't have to get close enough to feel and support because you agree with them.
You get close enough to feel and support so that you can understand them.
I said this simple description so many times.
You know why most people are Barris fans, or Packers fans, or Cardinals fans, or Cubs fans, or Browns fans?
Because somebody in their life was a fan of that.
Most fans of a team are because dad was, because mom was, because grandpa was, because I grew up on the south side of Chicago.
So go white socks, even though we suck.
Right?
Like, I mean, it's because of you were around them.
And so you get in there and you're like, man, Bears fans or Packers fans or Democrats or Republicans.
Man, you're just a horrible human being.
Man, they were raised that way probably.
So you get close enough to feel.
You get close enough to support and you get close enough not to agree, but to understand.
And what happens is we get to do the mission because we lay our armor and our swords down.
And instead of trying to convince them of our way, we get to help them find what is way more important than all those things.
And it's the Lord Jesus Christ and his gospel and his love and his grace and his kingdom.
Right?
So what can we do right now to practice proximity and empathy?
I'll put one before you.
And it'll be up on the screen.
Who is someone this week?
You could draw closer to, in proximity.
One.
One person right now that you can think of their name, you can see their face, try to see it, and you're at a little distance from them.
Maybe there's not a particular reason you are, or maybe you're worried that they voted differently,
Maybe they have a flag in their front yard that you don't agree with.
Maybe think if I get close, they're gonna rub that wind in my face.
Who is one person this week?
You could say, man, I'm gonna draw closer in proximity to them, not to change them, but to feel, to support if God would allow me to, to understand.
Why they are the way they are.
Not to make them a project, but to make them a person you fall in love with.
Here's what we're gonna do at the end of service.
We're gonna sing a song, but I'm gonna give you an opportunity to draw close and proximity to someone.
And it's named the Lord Jesus Christ.
So we do all the things, we worship and do all the things,
One of the things that this gathering allows us to do is it allows us to get in proximity to the God of the universe because he did everything to get in proximity to you.
You went to Lord once now more than anything.
It's not your service.
It's not your gold.
It's not even your time, talent and treasure.
He wants your worship and your presence.
Yes, he wants you to go and draw close in proximity to someone clearly from his word.
But right now, right here, He just wants you to come near and unite with Him in a beautiful moment of worship.
I know you're going to be tempted to leave.
I know you're going to be tempted to run and use the bathroom or get another cup of coffee.
I hope that the Spirit of the Lord is drawing you in a way that you say, you know what?
I'm going to take these three, four minutes of song, and I'm going to draw closer and approximate it to Him.
And here's why it's so important.
We will never, ever
ever feel what others feel till we feel what the Lord feels for us.
You cannot love unless you are loved.
You will never help someone walk unashamed if you are stuck in shame.
So use this time.
Let's stand and let's together draw in proximity to the Lord Jesus Christ.
Let's worship.